 In mathematics, a function[note 1] is a relation between sets that associates to every element of a first set exactly one element of the second set. Typical examples are functions from integers to integers or from the real numbers to real numbers.
 Functions were originally the idealization of how a varying quantity depends on another quantity. For example, the position of a planet is a function of time. Historically, the concept was elaborated with the infinitesimal calculus at the end of the 17th century, and, until the 19th century, the functions that were considered were differentiable (that is, they had a high degree of regularity). The concept of function was formalized at the end of the 19th century in terms of set theory, and this greatly enlarged the domains of application of the concept.
 A function is a process or a relation that associates each element  of a set ,  the domain of the function, to a single element  of another set  (possibly the same set), the codomain of the function. If the function is called , this relation is denoted  (which is spoken aloud as  of ), the element  is the argument or input of the function, and  is the value of the function, the output, or the image of  by .[1] The symbol that is used for representing the input is the variable of the function (one often says that  is a function of the variable ).
 A function is uniquely represented by the set of all pairs , called the graph of the function.[note 2] When the domain and the codomain are sets of real numbers, each such pair may be considered as the Cartesian coordinates of a point in the plane. The set of these points is called the graph of the function; it is a popular means to illustrate the function.
 Functions are widely used in science, and in most fields of mathematics. It has been said that functions are "the central objects of investigation" in most fields of mathematics.[2]
 Intuitively, a function is a process that associates to each element of a set  a single element of a set .
 Formally, a function  from a set  to a set  is defined by a set  of ordered pairs  such that , , and every element of  is the first component of exactly one ordered pair in .[3][note 3] In other words, for every  in , there is exactly one element  such that the ordered pair  belongs to the set of pairs defining the function . The set  is called the graph of the function. Formally speaking, it may be identified with the function, but this hides the usual interpretation of a function as a process. Therefore, in common usage, the function is generally distinguished from its graph. Functions are also called maps or mappings, though some authors make some distinction between "maps" and "functions" (see section #Map).
 In the definition of function,  and  are respectively called the domain and the codomain of the function . If  belongs to the set defining , then  is the image of  under , or the value of  applied to the argument . Especially in the context of numbers, one says also that  is the value of  for the value  of its variable, or, still shorter,  is the value of  of , denoted as .
 Two functions  and  are equal if their domain and codomain sets are the same and their output values agree on the whole domain. Formally,  if  for all , where  and .[4][5][note 4]
 The domain and codomain are not always explicitly given when a function is defined, and, without some (possibly difficult) computation, one knows only that the domain is contained in a larger set. Typically, this occurs in mathematical analysis, where "a function  often refers to a function that may have a proper subset of  as domain. For example, a "function from the reals to the reals" may refer to a real-valued function of a real variable, and this phrase does not mean that the domain of the function is the whole set of the real numbers, but only that the domain is a set of real numbers that contains a non-empty open interval; such a function is then called a partial function. For example, if  is a function that has the real numbers as domain and codomain, then a function mapping the value  to the value  is a function  from the reals to the reals, whose domain is the set of the reals , such that .
 The range of a function is the set of the images of all elements in the domain. However, range is sometimes used as a synonym of codomain, generally in old textbooks.[]
 Any subset of the Cartesian product of two sets  and  defines a binary relation  between these two sets. It is immediate that an arbitrary relation may contain pairs that violate the necessary conditions for a function, given above.
 A univalent or functional relation is a relation such that
 for all  in  and  in . Univalent relations may be identified with functions with codomain  whose domain is a subset of .
 A total relation is a relation such that
 Formally, functions are identified as relations that are both univalent and total. Univalent relations that are not total are called partial functions.
 Various properties of functions and function composition may be reformulated in the language of relations. For example, a function is injective if the converse relation  is univalent, where the converse relation is defined as [6]
 The set of all functions from some given domain to a codomain is sometimes identified with the Cartesian product of copies of the codomain, indexed by the domain. Namely, given sets  and  any function  is an element of the Cartesian product of copies of s over the index set 
 Viewing  as tuple with coordinates, then for each , the th coordinate of this tuple is the value  This reflects the intuition that for each  the function picks some element  namely,  (This point of view is used for example in the discussion of a choice function.)
 Infinite Cartesian products are often simply "defined" as sets of functions.[7]
 There are various standard ways for denoting functions. The most commonly used notation is functional notation, which defines the function using an equation that gives the names of the function and the argument explicitly.  This gives rise to a subtle point, often glossed over in elementary treatments of functions: functions are distinct from their values.  Thus, a function  should be distinguished from its value  at the value  in its domain.  To some extent, even working mathematicians will conflate the two in informal settings for convenience, and to avoid appearing pedantic.  However, strictly speaking, it is an abuse of notation to write "let  be the function  ", since  and  should both be understood as the value of f at x, rather than the function itself.  Instead, it is correct, though long-winded, to write "let  be the function defined by the equation  valid for all real values of  ".  A compact phrasing is "let  with " where the redundant "be the function" is omitted and, by convention, "for all  in the domain of " is understood.
 This distinction in language and notation becomes important in cases where functions themselves serve as inputs for other functions.  (A function taking another function as an input is termed a functional.)  Other approaches to denoting functions, detailed below, avoid this problem but are less commonly used.
 As first used by Leonhard Euler in 1734,[8] functions are denoted by a symbol consisting generally of a single letter in italic font, most often the lower-case letters . Some widely used functions are represented by a symbol consisting of several letters (usually two or three, generally an abbreviation of their name). By convention, in this case, a roman type is used, such as "" for the sine function, in contrast to italic font for single-letter symbols.
 The notation (read: " equals  of ")
 means that the pair  belongs to the set of pairs defining the function . If  is the domain of , the set of pairs defining the function is thus, using set-builder notation,
 Often, a definition of the function is given by what f does to the explicit argument x.  For example, a function f can be defined by the equation
 for all real numbers x.  In this example, f can be thought of as the composite of several simpler functions: squaring, adding 1, and taking the sine.  However, only the sine function has a common explicit symbol (sin), while the combination of squaring and then adding 1 is described by the polynomial expression .  In order to explicitly reference functions such as squaring or adding 1 without introducing new function names (e.g., by defining function g and h by  and ), one of the methods below (arrow notation or dot notation) could be used.
 Sometimes the parentheses of functional notation are omitted when the symbol denoting the function consists of several characters and no ambiguity may arise.  For example,  can be written instead of 
 For explicitly expressing domain  and the codomain  of a function , the arrow notation is often used (read:  or ):
 or
 This is often used in relation with the arrow notation for elements (read: " maps  to "), often stacked immediately below the arrow notation giving the function symbol, domain, and codomain:
 For example, if a multiplication is defined on a set , then the square function  on  is unambiguously defined by (read: "the function  from  to  that maps  to ")
 the latter line being more commonly written
 Often, the expression giving the function symbol, domain and codomain is omitted.  Thus, the arrow notation is useful for avoiding introducing a symbol for a function that is defined, as it is often the case, by a formula expressing the value of the function in terms of its argument.  As a common application of the arrow notation, suppose  is a two-argument function, and we want to refer to a partially applied function  produced by fixing the second argument to the value  without introducing a new function name.  The map in question could be denoted  using the arrow notation for elements. The expression  (read: "the map taking  to ") represents this new function with just one argument, whereas the expression  refers to the value of the function  at the 
 Index notation is often used instead of functional notation. That is, instead of writing , one writes 
 This is typically the case for functions whose domain is the set of the natural numbers. Such a function is called a sequence, and, in this case the element  is called the th element of sequence.
 The index notation is also often used for distinguishing some variables called parameters from the "true variables". In fact, parameters are specific variables that are considered as being fixed during the study of a problem.  For example, the map  (see above) would be denoted  using index notation, if we define the collection of maps  by the formula  for all .
 In the notation

the symbol  does not represent any value, it is simply a placeholder meaning that, if  is replaced by any value on the left of the arrow, it should be replaced by the same value on the right of the arrow. Therefore,  may be replaced by any symbol, often an interpunct "". This may be useful for distinguishing the function  from its value  at .
 For example,  may stand for the function , and  may stand for a function defined by an integral with variable upper bound: .
 There are other, specialized notations for functions in sub-disciplines of mathematics.  For example, in linear algebra and functional analysis, linear forms and the vectors they act upon are denoted using a dual pair to show the underlying duality.  This is similar to the use of bra–ket notation in quantum mechanics.  In logic and the theory of computation, the function notation of lambda calculus is used to explicitly express the basic notions of function abstraction and application.  In category theory and homological algebra, networks of functions are described in terms of how they and their compositions commute with each other using commutative diagrams that extend and generalize the arrow notation for functions described above.
 A function is often also called a map or a mapping, but some authors make a distinction between the term "map" and "function". For example, the term "map" is often reserved for a "function" with some sort of special structure (e.g. maps of manifolds). In particular map is often used in place of homomorphism for the sake of succinctness (e.g., linear map or map from  to  instead of group homomorphism from  to ). Some authors[16] reserve the word mapping for the case where the structure of the codomain belongs explicitly to the definition of the function. 
 Some authors, such as Serge Lang,[17] use "function" only to refer to maps for which the codomain is a subset of the real or complex numbers, and use the term mapping for more general functions.
 In the theory of dynamical systems, a map denotes an evolution function used to create discrete dynamical systems. See also Poincaré map.
 Whichever definition of map is used, related terms like domain, codomain, injective, continuous have the same meaning as for a function.
 Given a function , by definition, to each element  of the domain of the function , there is a unique element associated to it, the value  of  at . There are several ways to specify or describe how  is related to , both explicitly and implicitly. Sometimes, a theorem or an axiom asserts the existence of a function having some properties, without describing it more precisely. Often, the specification or description is referred to as the definition of the function .
 On a finite set, a function may be defined by listing the elements of the codomain that are associated to the elements of the domain. E.g., if , then one can define a function  by 
 Functions are often defined by a formula that describes a combination of arithmetic operations and previously defined functions; such a formula allows computing the value of the function from the value of any element of the domain.
For example, in the above example,  can be defined by the formula , for .
 When a function is defined this way, the determination of its domain is sometimes difficult. If the formula that defines the function contains divisions, the values of the variable for which a denominator is zero must be excluded from the domain; thus, for a complicated function, the determination of the domain passes through the computation of the zeros of auxiliary functions. Similarly, if square roots occur in the definition of a function from  to  the domain is included in the set of the values of the variable for which the arguments of the square roots are nonnegative.
 For example,  defines a function  whose domain is  because  is always positive if  is a real number. On the other hand,  defines a function from the reals to the reals whose domain is reduced to the interval . (In old texts, such a domain was called the domain of definition of the function.)
 Functions are often classified by the nature of formulas that can that define them:
 A function  with domain  and codomain , is bijective, if for every  in , there is one and only one element  in  such that . In this case, the inverse function of  is the function  that maps  to the element  such that . For example, the natural logarithm is a bijective function from the positive real numbers to the real numbers. It has these an inverse, called the exponential function that maps the real numbers onto the positive numbers.
 If a function  is not bijective, it may occur that one can select subsets  and  such that the restriction of  to  is a bijection from  to , and has thus an inverse. The inverse trigonometric functions are defined this way. For example, the cosine function induces, by restriction, a bijection from the interval  onto the interval , and its inverse function, called arccosine, maps  onto . The other inverse trigonometric functions are defined similarly.
 More generally, given a binary relation  between two sets  and , let  be a subset of  such that, for every  there is some  such that . If one has a criterion allowing selecting such an  for every  this defines a function  called an implicit function, because it is implicitly defined by the relation .
 For example, the equation of the unit circle  defines a relation on real numbers. If  there are two possible values of , one positive and one negative. For , these two values become both equal to 0. Otherwise, there is no possible value of . This means that the equation defines two implicit functions with domain  and respective codomains  and .
 In this example, the equation can be solved in , giving  but, in more complicated examples, this is impossible. For example, the relation  defines  as an implicit function of , called the Bring radical, which has  as domain and range. The Bring radical cannot be expressed in terms of the four arithmetic operations and th roots.
 The implicit function theorem provides mild differentiability conditions for existence and uniqueness of an implicit function in the neighborhood of a point.
 Many functions can be defined as the antiderivative of another function. This is the case of the natural logarithm, which is the antiderivative of  that is 0 for . Another common example is the error function.
 More generally, many functions, including most special functions, can be defined as solutions of differential equations. The simplest example is probably the exponential function, which can be defined as the unique function that is equal to its derivative and takes the value 1 for .
 Power series can be used to define functions on the domain in which they converge. For example, the exponential function is given by . However, as the coefficients of a series are quite arbitrary, a function that is the sum of a convergent series is generally defined otherwise, and the sequence of the coefficients is the result of some computation based on another definition. Then, the power series can be used to enlarge the domain of the function. Typically, if a function for a real variable is the sum of its Taylor series in some interval, this power series allows immediately enlarging the domain to a subset of the complex numbers, the disc of convergence of the series. Then analytic continuation allows enlarging further the domain for including almost the whole complex plane. This process is the method that is generally used for defining the logarithm, the exponential and the trigonometric functions of a complex number.
 Functions whose domain are the nonnegative integers, known as sequences, are often defined by recurrence relations.
 The factorial function on the nonnegative integers () is a basic example, as it can be defined by the recurrence relation
 and the initial condition
 A graph is commonly used to give an intuitive picture of a function.  As an example of how a graph helps to understand a function, it is easy to see from its graph whether a function is increasing or decreasing. Some functions may also be represented by bar charts.
 Given a function  its graph is, formally, the set
 In the frequent case where  and  are subsets of the real numbers (or may be identified with such subsets, e.g. intervals), an element  may be identified with a point having coordinates  in a 2-dimensional coordinate system, e.g. the Cartesian plane. Parts of this may create a plot that represents (parts of) the function. The use of plots is so ubiquitous that they too are called the graph of the function. Graphic representations of functions are also possible in other coordinate systems. For example, the graph of the square function
 consisting of all points with coordinates  for  yields, when depicted in Cartesian coordinates, the well known parabola. If the same quadratic function  with the same formal graph, consisting of pairs of numbers, is plotted instead in polar coordinates  the plot obtained is Fermat's spiral.
 A function can be represented as a table of values.  If the domain of a function is finite, then the function can be completely specified in this way.  For example, the multiplication function  defined as  can be represented by the familiar multiplication table
 On the other hand, if a function's domain is continuous, a table can give the values of the function at specific values of the domain.  If an intermediate value is needed, interpolation can be used to estimate the value of the function.  For example, a portion of a table for the sine function might be given as follows, with values rounded to 6 decimal places:
 Before the advent of handheld calculators and personal computers, such tables were often compiled and published for functions such as logarithms and trigonometric functions.
 Bar charts are often used for representing functions whose domain is a finite set, the natural numbers, or the integers. In this case, an element  of the domain is represented by an interval of the -axis, and the corresponding value of the function, , is represented by a rectangle whose base is the interval corresponding to  and whose height is  (possibly negative, in which case the bar extends below the -axis).
 This section describes general properties of functions, that are independent of specific properties of the domain and the codomain.
 There are a number of standard functions that occur frequently:
 Given two functions  and  such that the domain of  is the codomain of , their composition is the function  defined by
 That is, the value of  is obtained by first applying  to  to obtain  and then applying  to the result  to obtain . In the notation the function that is applied first is always written on the right.
 The composition  is an operation on functions that is defined only if the codomain of the first function is the domain of the second one. Even when both  and  satisfy these conditions, the composition is not necessarily commutative, that is, the functions  and  need not be equal, but may deliver different values for the same argument. For example, let  and , then  and  agree just for 
 The function composition is associative in the sense that, if one of  and  is defined, then the other is also defined, and they are equal. Thus, one writes
 The identity functions  and  are respectively a right identity and a left identity for functions from  to . That is, if  is a function with domain , and codomain , one has

 A composite function g(f(x)) can be visualized as the combination of two "machines".
 A simple example of a function composition
 Another composition. In this example, .
 Let  The image by  of an element  of the domain  is . If  is any subset of , then the image of  by , denoted  is the subset of the codomain  consisting of all images of elements of , that is,
 The image of  is the image of the whole domain, that is . It is also called the range of , although the term may also refer to the codomain.[18]
 On the other hand, the inverse image, or preimage by  of a subset  of the codomain  is the subset of the domain  consisting of all elements of  whose images belong to . It is denoted by   That is
 For example, the preimage of {4, 9} under the square function is the set {−3,−2,2,3}.
 By definition of a function, the image of an element  of the domain is always a single element of the codomain. However, the preimage of a single element , denoted  may be empty or contain any number of elements. For example, if  is the function from the integers to themselves that maps every integer to 0, then .
 If  is a function,  and  are subsets of , and  and  are subsets of , then one has the following properties:
 The preimage by  of an element  of the codomain is sometimes called, in some contexts, the fiber of  under .
 If a function  has an inverse (see below), this inverse is denoted  In this case  may denote either the image by  or the preimage by  of . This is not a problem, as these sets are equal. The notation  and  may be ambiguous in the case of sets that contain some subsets as elements, such as  In this case, some care may be needed, for example, by using square brackets  for images and preimages of subsets, and ordinary parentheses for images and preimages of elements.
 Let  be a function.
 The function  is injective (or one-to-one, or is an injection) if  for any two different elements  and  of . Equivalently,  is injective if, for any  the preimage  contains at most one element. An empty function is always injective. If  is not the empty set, and if, as usual, Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory is assumed, then  is injective if and only if there exists a function  such that  that is, if  has a left inverse. If  is injective, for defining , one chooses an element  in  (which exists as  is supposed to be nonempty),[note 6]  and one defines  by  if  and , if 
 The function  is surjective (or onto, or is a surjection) if the range equals the codomain, that is, if . In other words, the preimage  of every  is nonempty. If, as usual, the axiom of choice is assumed, then  is surjective if and only if there exists a function  such that  that is, if  has a right inverse. The axiom of choice is needed, because, if  is surjective, one defines  by  where  is an arbitrarily chosen element of 
 The function  is bijective (or is bijection or a one-to-one correspondence) if it is both injective and surjective. That is  is bijective if, for any  the preimage  contains exactly one element. The function  is bijective if and only if it admits an inverse function, that is a function  such that  and  (Contrarily to the case of surjections, this does not require the axiom of choice.)
 Every function  may be factorized as the composition  of a surjection followed by an injection, where  is the canonical surjection of  onto , and  is the canonical injection of  into . This is the canonical factorization of .
 "One-to-one" and "onto" are terms that were more common in the older English language literature; "injective", "surjective", and "bijective" were originally coined as French words in the second quarter of the 20th century by the Bourbaki group and imported into English.  As a word of caution, "a one-to-one function" is one that is injective, while a "one-to-one correspondence" refers to a bijective function.  Also, the statement " maps  onto " differs from "  maps  into " in that the former implies that  is surjective, while the latter makes no assertion about the nature of  the mapping.  In a complicated reasoning, the one letter difference can easily be missed. Due to the confusing nature of this older terminology, these terms have declined in popularity relative to the Bourbakian terms, which have also the advantage to be more symmetrical.
 If  is a function and S is a subset of X, then the restriction of  to S, denoted , is the function from S to Y defined by
 for all x in S. Restrictions can be used to define partial inverse functions: if there is a subset S of the domain of a function  such that  is injective, then the canonical surjection of  onto its image  is a bijection, and thus has an inverse function from  to S. One application is the definition of inverse trigonometric functions. For example, the cosine function is injective when restricted to the interval . The image of this restriction is the interval , and thus the restriction has an inverse function from  to , which is called arccosine and is denoted .
 Function restriction may also be used for "gluing" functions together. Let  be the decomposition of  as a union of subsets, and suppose that a function  is defined on each  such that for each pair  of indices, the restrictions of  and  to  are equal. Then this defines a unique function  such that  for all . This is the way that functions on manifolds are defined.
 An extension of a  function  is a function  such that  is a restriction of . A typical use of this concept is the process of analytic continuation, that allows extending functions whose domain is a small part of the complex plane to functions whose domain is almost the whole complex plane.
 Here is another classical example of a function extension that is encountered when studying homographies of the real line. A homography is a function  such that . Its domain is the set of all real numbers different from  and its image is the set of all real numbers different from  If one extends the real line to the projectively extended real line by including , one may extend  to a bijection from the extended real line to itself by setting  and .
 A multivariate function, or function of several variables is a function that depends on several arguments. Such functions are commonly encountered. For example, the position of a car on a road is a function of the time and its speed.
 More formally, a function of  variables is a function whose domain is a set of -tuples.
For example, multiplication of integers is a function of two variables, or bivariate function, whose domain is the set of all pairs (2-tuples) of integers, and whose codomain is the set of integers. The same is true for every binary operation. More generally, every mathematical operation is defined as a multivariate function.
 The Cartesian product  of  sets  is the set of all -tuples  such that  for every  with . Therefore, a function of  variables is a function
 where the domain  has the form
 When using function notation, one usually omits the parentheses surrounding tuples, writing  instead of 
 In the case where all the  are equal to the set  of real numbers, one has a function of several real variables. If the  are equal to the set  of complex numbers, one has a function of several complex variables.
 It is common to also consider functions whose codomain is a product of sets. For example, Euclidean division maps every pair  of integers with  to a pair of integers called the quotient and the remainder:
 The codomain may also be a vector space. In this case, one talks of a vector-valued function. If the domain is contained in a Euclidean space, or more generally a manifold, a vector-valued function is often called a vector field.
 The idea of function, starting in the 17th century, was fundamental to the new infinitesimal calculus (see History of the function concept). At that time, only real-valued functions of a real variable were considered, and all functions were assumed to be smooth. But the definition was soon extended to functions of several variables and to functions of a complex variable.  In the second half of the 19th century, the mathematically rigorous definition of a function was introduced, and functions with arbitrary domains and codomains were defined.
 Functions are now used throughout all areas of mathematics.  In introductory calculus, when the word function is used without qualification, it means a real-valued function of a single real variable.  The more general definition of a function is usually introduced to second or third year college students with STEM majors, and in their senior year they are introduced to calculus in a larger, more rigorous setting in courses such as real analysis and complex analysis.
 A real function is a real-valued function of a real variable, that is, a function whose codomain is the field of real numbers and whose domain is a set of real numbers that contains an interval. In this section, these functions are simply called functions.
 The functions that are most commonly considered in mathematics and its applications have some regularity, that is they are continuous, differentiable, and even analytic. This regularity insures that these functions can be visualized by their graphs. In this section, all functions are differentiable in some interval.
 Functions enjoy pointwise operations, that is, if  and  are functions, their sum, difference and product are functions defined  by
 The domains of the resulting functions are the intersection of the domains of  and . The quotient of two functions is defined similarly by
 but the domain of the resulting function is obtained by removing the zeros of  from the intersection of the domains of  and .
 The polynomial functions are defined by polynomials, and their domain is the whole set of real numbers. They include constant functions, linear functions and quadratic functions. Rational functions are quotients of two polynomial functions, and their domain is the real numbers with a finite number of them removed to avoid division by zero.  The simplest rational function is the function  whose graph is a hyperbola, and whose domain is the whole real line except for 0.
 The derivative of a real differentiable function is a real function. An antiderivative of a continuous real function is a real function that is differentiable in any open interval in which the original function is continuous. For example, the function  is continuous, and even differentiable, on the positive real numbers. Thus one antiderivative, which takes the value zero for , is a differentiable function called the natural logarithm.
 A real function  is monotonic in an interval if the sign of  does not depend of the choice of  and  in the interval. If the function is differentiable in the interval, it is monotonic if the sign of the derivative is constant in the interval. If a real function  is monotonic in an interval , it has an inverse function, which is a real function with domain  and image . This is how inverse trigonometric functions are defined in terms of trigonometric functions, where the trigonometric functions are monotonic. Another example: the natural logarithm is monotonic on the positive real numbers, and its image is the whole real line; therefore it has an inverse function that is a bijection between the real numbers and the positive real numbers. This inverse is the exponential function.
 Many other real functions are defined either by the implicit function theorem (the inverse function is a particular instance) or as solutions of differential equations. For example, the sine and the cosine functions are the solutions of the linear differential equation
 such that
 When the elements of the codomain of a function are vectors, the function is said to be a vector-valued function. These functions are particularly useful in applications, for example modeling physical properties. For example, the function that associates to each point of a fluid its velocity vector is a vector-valued function.
 Some vector-valued functions are defined on a subset of  or other spaces that share geometric or topological properties of , such as manifolds. These vector-valued functions are given the name vector fields.
 In mathematical analysis, and more specifically in functional analysis, a function space is a set of scalar-valued or vector-valued functions, which share a specific property and form a topological vector space. For example, the real smooth functions with a compact support (that is, they are zero outside some compact set) form a function space that is at the basis of the theory of distributions.
 Function spaces play a fundamental role in advanced mathematical analysis, by allowing the use of their algebraic and topological properties for studying properties of functions. For example, all theorems of existence and uniqueness of solutions of ordinary or partial differential equations result of the study of function spaces.
 Several methods for specifying functions of real or complex variables start from a local definition of the function at a point or on a neighbourhood of a point, and then extend by continuity the function to a much larger domain. Frequently, for a starting point  there are several possible starting values for the function.
 For example, in defining the square root as the inverse function of the square function, for any positive real number  there are two choices for the value of the square root, one of which is positive and denoted  and another which is negative and denoted  These choices define two continuous functions, both having the nonnegative real numbers as a domain, and having either the nonnegative or the nonpositive real numbers as images. When looking at the graphs of these functions, one can see that, together, they form a single smooth curve. It is therefore often useful to consider these two square root functions as a single function that has two values for positive , one value for 0 and no value for negative .
 In the preceding example, one choice, the positive square root, is more natural than the other. This is not the case in general. For example, let consider the implicit function that maps  to a root  of  (see the figure on the right). For  one may choose either  for  By the implicit function theorem, each choice defines a function; for the first one, the (maximal) domain is the interval  and the image is ; for the second one, the domain is  and the image is ; for the last one, the domain is  and the image is . As the three graphs together form a smooth curve, and there is no reason for preferring one choice, these three functions are often considered as a single multi-valued function of  that has three values for , and only one value for  and .
 Usefulness of the concept of multi-valued functions is clearer when considering complex functions, typically analytic functions. The domain to which a complex function may be extended by analytic continuation generally consists of almost the whole complex plane. However, when extending the domain through two different paths, one often gets different values. For example, when extending the domain of the square root function, along a path of complex numbers with positive imaginary parts, one gets  for the square root of –1; while, when extending through complex numbers with negative imaginary parts, one gets . There are generally two ways of solving the problem. One may define a function that is not continuous along some curve, called a branch cut. Such a function is called the principal value of the function. The other way is to consider that one has a multi-valued function, which is analytic everywhere except for isolated singularities, but whose value may "jump" if one follows a closed loop around a singularity. This jump is called the monodromy.
 The definition of a function that is given in this article requires the concept of set, since the domain and the codomain of a function must be a set. This is not a problem in usual mathematics, as it is generally not difficult to consider only functions whose domain and codomain are sets, which are well defined, even if the domain is not explicitly defined. However, it is sometimes useful to consider more general functions.
 For example, the singleton set may be considered as a function  Its domain would include all sets, and therefore would not be a set. In usual mathematics, one avoids this kind of problem by specifying a domain, which means that one has many singleton functions. However, when establishing foundations of mathematics, one may have to use functions whose domain, codomain or both are not specified, and some authors, often logicians, give precise definition for these weakly specified functions.[19]
 These generalized functions may be critical in the development of a formalization of the foundations of mathematics. For example, Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory, is an extension of the set theory in which the collection of all sets is a class. This theory includes the replacement axiom, which may be stated as: If  is a set and  is a function, then  is a set.
 In computer programming, a function is, in general, a piece of a computer program, which implements the abstract concept of function. That is, it is a program unit that produces an output for each input. However, in many programming languages every subroutine is called a function, even when there is no output, and when the functionality consists simply of modifying some data in the computer memory.
 Functional programming is the programming paradigm consisting of building programs by using only subroutines that behave like mathematical functions. For example, if_then_else is a function that takes three functions as arguments, and, depending on the result of the first function (true or false), returns the result of either the second or the third function. An important advantage of functional programming is that it makes easier program proofs, as being based on a well founded theory, the lambda calculus (see below).
 Except for computer-language terminology, "function" has the usual mathematical meaning in computer science. In this area, a property of major interest is the computability of a function. For giving a precise meaning to this concept, and to the related concept of algorithm, several models of computation have been introduced, the old ones being general recursive functions, lambda calculus and Turing machine. The fundamental theorem of computability theory is that these three models of computation define the same set of computable functions, and that all the other models of computation that have ever been proposed define the same set of computable functions or a smaller one. The Church–Turing thesis is the claim that every philosophically acceptable definition of a computable function defines also the same functions.
 General recursive functions are partial functions from integers to integers that can be defined from 
 via the operators
 Although defined only for functions from integers to integers, they can model any computable function as a consequence of the following properties:
 Lambda calculus is a theory that defines computable functions without using set theory, and is the theoretical background of functional programming. It consists of terms that are either variables, function definitions (λ-terms), or applications of functions to terms. Terms are manipulated through some rules, (the -equivalence, the -reduction, and the -conversion), which are the axioms of the theory and may be interpreted as rules of computation.
 In its original form, lambda calculus does not include the concepts of domain and codomain of a function. Roughly speaking, they have been introduced in the theory under the name of type in typed lambda calculus. Most kinds of typed lambda calculi can define fewer functions than untyped lambda calculus.
